content/docs/tips/avr.md, before:

---
title: Arduino / AVR
weight: 10
---

# Arduino / AVR

## TinyAVR-0/1 Programming

I bought a couple of ATtiny412 Microcontrollers as a replacement for the trusty ATtiny85 parts
that I liked to use for small projects before. Sadly, it is not available in DIP packages
anymore but it also has only 8 pins.

Because I have programmed the new Arduino Nano Every and even a bare ATmega4809 chip before,
I knew that there is some form of support in the Arduino suite and/or in PlatformIO.

### UPDI Programmer

Programming is done over a new protocol, called UPDI. You can flash an ATmega328P to be an
`avrdude`-compatible translator .. or you can simply build a very simple programming cable and
use any serial adapter. All you need to do is connect RX and TX with a resistor in series with
TX:

```
Serial            Device

  TX╶─╴4.7kΩ╶─╮
              ├──╴UPDI
  RX╶─────────╯

```

This cable can be used with [`pyupdi.py`](https://github.com/mraardvark/pyupdi) or
[`updiprog`](https://github.com/Polarisru/updiprog).

### Blink Example with `avr-gcc` Compiler Toolchain

The source code for a minimal blink example looks somewhat like this:

```c
#include <avr/io.h>
#include <util/delay.h>

#define PIN 1
#define PERIOD 1000

int main(void) {
  PORTA.DIRSET = 1 << PIN;
  for (;;) {
    PORTA.OUTSET = 1 << PIN;
    _delay_ms(PERIOD);
    PORTA.OUTCLR = 1 << PIN;
    _delay_ms(PERIOD);
  }
}
```

In order to compile this for the `avrxmega3` target, you'll need to get a compatible compiler
toolchain first. My version of `avr-gcc` did know about the target and recognized the
`-mmcu=attiny412` argument – however compilation failed because support was missing in my
copy of `avr-libc`. An [article by Omzlo](https://www.omzlo.com/articles/baremetal-programming-on-the-tinyavr-0-micro-controllers#software) ([archive](https://archive.vn/XvvRh))
describes the entire process in a little more detail, including how to get the necessary device
pack files from Microchip. Being an Arch Linux user, I simply installed
[`avr-libc-avrxmega3-svn`](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/avr-libc-avrxmega3-svn/), which
adds support for `avrxmega3` by applying a [patch](https://file.savannah.nongnu.org/file/avrxmega3-v10.diff.xz?file_id=48974)
during compilation.

With this toolchain you can use a build process like this:

```bash
GCC_ARGS=(-mmcu=attiny412 -DF_CPU=3333333L -Os)
avr-gcc "${GCC_ARGS[@]}" -c blink.c -o blink.o
avr-gcc "${GCC_ARGS[@]}" blink.o -o blink.elf
avr-objcopy -O ihex -R .eeprom blink.elf blink.hex
updiprog -d tiny41x -c /dev/ttyUSB0 -e -w blink.hex
```

### Adding Baremetal Support in PlatformIO

Support can also be added to PlatformIO with a custom board definition and a modified
`upload_command`. The compiler toolchain that is used for the `atmelmegaavr` platform
already has support for this family because they are very similar to the Arduino Nano
Every and ATmega4809 mentioned above.

Add the file [`attiny412.json`](/assets/attiny412.json) in a subdirectory `boards/` of
your PlatformIO project and use `board = attiny412` in the config file along with a
new `upload_command`:

```ini
[env:tinyavr]
platform = atmelmegaavr
board = attiny412
upload_command = updiprog -d tiny41x -c $UPLOAD_PORT -b $UPLOAD_SPEED -e -w $SOURCE
```

It should be trivial to adjust the board definition for other microcontrollers in the
same family.

### Alternative for Baremetal Support in PlatformIO

Another alternative to creating a full board JSON is simply not specifying a board
at all, apparently. I have successfully used this `platformio.ini` to program and flash
an ATmega16U2 (that is the "USB-to-Serial" chip on an Arduino Uno R3 .. yes, you have
*two* microcontrollers on that board):

```ini
[env:atmega16u2]
platform = atmelavr
board_build.mcu = atmega16u2
board_build.f_cpu = 16000000UL
board_upload.maximum_size = 16384
board_upload.maximum_ram_size = 512

upload_protocol = custom
upload_flags =
  -cusbtiny
  -pm16u2
upload_command = /usr/bin/avrdude $UPLOAD_FLAGS -U flash:w:$SOURCE:i
```

## Flashing over ISP header

Recently I had the need to program an Arduino that was not responding over USB,
i.e. the bootloader was probably broken somehow. I wrote a [blog entry][blog] about that.

[blog]: https://semjonov.de/post/2019-11/flash-arduino-without-a-bootloader-from-a-raspberry-pi/

The usual ISP header on an Arduino is mapped like this:

```
     ┏─────╮
MISO │ 1 2 │ VCC
 SCK │ 3 4 │ MOSI
 RST │ 5 6 │ GND
     ╰─────╯
```

### Sparkfun FTDI FT232R Breakout Board

The FT232R provides a straightforward ["bit-bang" mode][bitbang] to drive these pins. Some
breakout boards come with an ISP header directly soldered on but you can also just use the
breadboard pins on a full breakout. I'm using a Sparkfun FT232R Breakout to do this.

[bitbang]: https://www.ftdichip.com/Support/Documents/AppNotes/AN_232R-01_Bit_Bang_Mode_Available_For_FT232R_and_Ft245R.pdf

These are the pins of a FT232R which correspond to the above ISP header:

```
     ┏─────╮
 CTS │ 1 2 │ VCC
 DSR │ 3 4 │ DCD
  RI │ 5 6 │ GND
     ╰─────╯
```

On the bottom of the Sparkfun breakout the legs are mapped like this:

```
         USB
┏───────────────────╮
│ ■ DCD     PWREN □ │
│ ■ DSR     TXDEN □ │
│ ■ GND     SLEEP □ │
│ ■ RI        CTS ■ │
│ □ RXD      V3.3 □ │
│ □ VCCIO     VCC ■ │
│ □ RTS     RXLED □ │
│ □ DTR     TXLED □ │
│ □ TXD       GND □ │
│      □ □ □ □      │
╰───────────────────╯
```

This configuration should come shipped with a decently modern `avrdude` version
already. If it's not, here is a copy:

```
# see http://www.geocities.jp/arduino_diecimila/bootloader/index_en.html
# Note: pins are numbered from 1!
programmer
  id    = "arduino-ft232r";
  desc  = "Arduino: FT232R connected to ISP";
  type  = "ftdi_syncbb";
  connection_type = usb;
  miso  = 3;  # CTS X3(1)
  sck   = 5;  # DSR X3(2)
  mosi  = 6;  # DCD X3(3)
  reset = 7;  # RI  X3(4)
;
```

Using `avrdude` like this is said to be slower than other methods but in my testing it
turned out to be decently quick -- not "minutes" like some comments suggest anyway.

    avrdude -c arduino-ft232r -p m328p -v


### Adafruit FTDI FT232H Breakout Board

Even better, the FT232H provides a proper MPSSE SPI interface. I mentioned above that
bit-banging is said to be slower but I didn't perceive it as too bad. Oh it *does* make
a difference! Performing a simple benchmark with successive readout and writebacks of
the `eeprom` and `flash` areas on an Arduino Nano clone took **16 seconds** using the
FT232H while it took over **two minutes** on the FT232R.

Looking from the top, the pins on the Adafruit board are used like this:

```
        USB
┏──────────────────╮
│ ■ 5V        C9 □ │
│ ■ GND       C8 □ │
│ ■ D0 SCK    C7 □ │
│ ■ D1 MOSI   C6 □ │
│ ■ D2 MISO   C5 □ │
│ ■ D3 RST    C4 □ │
│ □ D4        C3 □ │
│ □ D5        C2 □ │
│ □ D6        C1 □ │
│ □ D7        C0 □ │
╰──────────────────╯
```

The pins are all nicely in one row, so you can easily craft a custom cable, too.

![](/assets/ft232h.png)

The `avrdude` config was first described on [helix.air.net.au][helix] and is now integrated in the
systemwide config as programmer `UM232H`:

[helix]: http://www.jdunman.com/ww/AmateurRadio/SDR/helix_air_net_au%20%20AVRDUDE%20and%20FTDI%20232H.htm "Mirror"

```
# UM232H module from FTDI and Glyn.com.au.
# See helix.air.net.au for detailed usage information.
# /* ... */
# Use the -b flag to set the SPI clock rate eg -b 3750000 is the fastest I could get
# a 16MHz Atmega1280 to program reliably.  The 232H is conveniently 5V tolerant.
programmer
  id         = "UM232H";
  desc       = "FT232H based module from FTDI and Glyn.com.au";
  type       = "avrftdi";
  usbvid     = 0x0403;
  usbpid     = 0x6014;
  usbdev     = "A";
  usbvendor  = "";
  usbproduct = "";
  usbsn      = "";
#ISP-signals
  sck    = 0;
  mosi   = 1;
  miso   = 2;
  reset  = 3;
;
```

I've created two straightforward programmer aliases in my `~/.avrduderc` config and
can use these two breakout boards with `avrdude -c ft232r` and `avrdude -c ft232h`
respectively:

```
# alias for adafruit ft232h
programmer parent "UM232H"
  id         = "ft232h";
  desc       = "Adafruit FT232H based SPI programmer";
;

# alias for sparkfun ft232r breakout
programmer parent "arduino-ft232r"
  id         = "ft232r";
  desc       = "Sparkfun FT232R breakout bit-banging";
;
```

### Raspberry Pi

At the time, however, I used the GPIO pins on a Raspberry Pi Zero W and amended the
`avrdude` configuration to use bit-banging as well. Here is a possible
mapping of the GPIO pins on the 40-pin header:

```
                15 ┆ · · ┆ 16
          3.3V  17 │ x · │ 18
(GPIO 10) MOSI  19 │ x x │ 20  GND
(GPIO 09) MISO  21 │ x x │ 22  Reset (GPIO 25)
(GPIO 11) SCLK  23 │ x · │ 24
                25 ┆ · · ┆ 25
```

This wiring can be used with the following `avrdude` programmer configuration:

```
# avr programmer via linux gpio pins
programmer
  id    = "gpio";
  desc  = "Use the Linux sysfs to bitbang GPIO lines";
  type  = "linuxgpio";
  reset = 25;
  sck   = 11;
  mosi  = 10;
  miso  = 9;
;
```

Put that in `~/.avrduderc` or a seperate file, which can be included with
`avrdude -C +gpio.conf ...`. Now use this programmer config like this:

    sudo avrdude -c gpio -p m1284p -v

Commit message:

docs: add firmware dump of uno r3's atmega16u2 to avr tips

content/docs/tips/avr.md, after:

---
title: Arduino / AVR
weight: 10
---

# Arduino / AVR

## TinyAVR-0/1 Programming

I bought a couple of ATtiny412 Microcontrollers as a replacement for the trusty ATtiny85 parts
that I liked to use for small projects before. Sadly, it is not available in DIP packages
anymore but it also has only 8 pins.

Because I have programmed the new Arduino Nano Every and even a bare ATmega4809 chip before,
I knew that there is some form of support in the Arduino suite and/or in PlatformIO.

### UPDI Programmer

Programming is done over a new protocol, called UPDI. You can flash an ATmega328P to be an
`avrdude`-compatible translator .. or you can simply build a very simple programming cable and
use any serial adapter. All you need to do is connect RX and TX with a resistor in series with
TX:

```
Serial            Device

  TX╶─╴4.7kΩ╶─╮
              ├──╴UPDI
  RX╶─────────╯

```

This cable can be used with [`pyupdi.py`](https://github.com/mraardvark/pyupdi) or
[`updiprog`](https://github.com/Polarisru/updiprog).

### Blink Example with `avr-gcc` Compiler Toolchain

The source code for a minimal blink example looks somewhat like this:

```c
#include <avr/io.h>
#include <util/delay.h>

#define PIN 1
#define PERIOD 1000

int main(void) {
  PORTA.DIRSET = 1 << PIN;
  for (;;) {
    PORTA.OUTSET = 1 << PIN;
    _delay_ms(PERIOD);
    PORTA.OUTCLR = 1 << PIN;
    _delay_ms(PERIOD);
  }
}
```

In order to compile this for the `avrxmega3` target, you'll need to get a compatible compiler
toolchain first. My version of `avr-gcc` did know about the target and recognized the
`-mmcu=attiny412` argument – however compilation failed because support was missing in my
copy of `avr-libc`. An [article by Omzlo](https://www.omzlo.com/articles/baremetal-programming-on-the-tinyavr-0-micro-controllers#software) ([archive](https://archive.vn/XvvRh))
describes the entire process in a little more detail, including how to get the necessary device
pack files from Microchip. Being an Arch Linux user, I simply installed
[`avr-libc-avrxmega3-svn`](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/avr-libc-avrxmega3-svn/), which
adds support for `avrxmega3` by applying a [patch](https://file.savannah.nongnu.org/file/avrxmega3-v10.diff.xz?file_id=48974)
during compilation.

With this toolchain you can use a build process like this:

```bash
GCC_ARGS=(-mmcu=attiny412 -DF_CPU=3333333L -Os)
avr-gcc "${GCC_ARGS[@]}" -c blink.c -o blink.o
avr-gcc "${GCC_ARGS[@]}" blink.o -o blink.elf
avr-objcopy -O ihex -R .eeprom blink.elf blink.hex
updiprog -d tiny41x -c /dev/ttyUSB0 -e -w blink.hex
```

### Adding Baremetal Support in PlatformIO

Support can also be added to PlatformIO with a custom board definition and a modified
`upload_command`. The compiler toolchain that is used for the `atmelmegaavr` platform
already has support for this family because they are very similar to the Arduino Nano
Every and ATmega4809 mentioned above.

Add the file [`attiny412.json`](/assets/attiny412.json) in a subdirectory `boards/` of
your PlatformIO project and use `board = attiny412` in the config file along with a
new `upload_command`:

```ini
[env:tinyavr]
platform = atmelmegaavr
board = attiny412
upload_command = updiprog -d tiny41x -c $UPLOAD_PORT -b $UPLOAD_SPEED -e -w $SOURCE
```

It should be trivial to adjust the board definition for other microcontrollers in the
same family.

### Alternative for Baremetal Support in PlatformIO

Another alternative to creating a full board JSON is simply not specifying a board
at all, apparently. I have successfully used this `platformio.ini` to program and flash
an ATmega16U2 (that is the "USB-to-Serial" chip on an Arduino Uno R3 .. yes, you have
*two* microcontrollers on that board):

```ini
[env:atmega16u2]
platform = atmelavr
board_build.mcu = atmega16u2
board_build.f_cpu = 16000000UL
board_upload.maximum_size = 16384
board_upload.maximum_ram_size = 512

upload_protocol = custom
upload_flags =
  -cusbtiny
  -pm16u2
upload_command = /usr/bin/avrdude $UPLOAD_FLAGS -U flash:w:$SOURCE:i
```

Note: if you're going to play with the ATmega16U2 on your Arduino UNO R3, I have
[a firmware dump of mine](/assets/arduino_uno_r3_16u2.zip)
if you need to restore its full functionality later. There may be quirks about
the protected USB bootloader region. The original "combined" firmware can be found
in your Arduino installation's firmware data:
`~/.arduino15/packages/arduino/hardware/avr/1.8.1/firmwares/atmegaxxu2`

## Flashing over ISP header

Recently I had the need to program an Arduino that was not responding over USB,
i.e. the bootloader was probably broken somehow. I wrote a [blog entry][blog] about that.

[blog]: https://semjonov.de/post/2019-11/flash-arduino-without-a-bootloader-from-a-raspberry-pi/

The usual ISP header on an Arduino is mapped like this:

```
     ┏─────╮
MISO │ 1 2 │ VCC
 SCK │ 3 4 │ MOSI
 RST │ 5 6 │ GND
     ╰─────╯
```

### Sparkfun FTDI FT232R Breakout Board

The FT232R provides a straightforward ["bit-bang" mode][bitbang] to drive these pins. Some
breakout boards come with an ISP header directly soldered on but you can also just use the
breadboard pins on a full breakout. I'm using a Sparkfun FT232R Breakout to do this.

[bitbang]: https://www.ftdichip.com/Support/Documents/AppNotes/AN_232R-01_Bit_Bang_Mode_Available_For_FT232R_and_Ft245R.pdf

These are the pins of a FT232R which correspond to the above ISP header:

```
     ┏─────╮
 CTS │ 1 2 │ VCC
 DSR │ 3 4 │ DCD
  RI │ 5 6 │ GND
     ╰─────╯
```

On the bottom of the Sparkfun breakout the legs are mapped like this:

```
         USB
┏───────────────────╮
│ ■ DCD     PWREN □ │
│ ■ DSR     TXDEN □ │
│ ■ GND     SLEEP □ │
│ ■ RI        CTS ■ │
│ □ RXD      V3.3 □ │
│ □ VCCIO     VCC ■ │
│ □ RTS     RXLED □ │
│ □ DTR     TXLED □ │
│ □ TXD       GND □ │
│      □ □ □ □      │
╰───────────────────╯
```

This configuration should come shipped with a decently modern `avrdude` version
already. If it's not, here is a copy:

```
# see http://www.geocities.jp/arduino_diecimila/bootloader/index_en.html
# Note: pins are numbered from 1!
programmer
  id    = "arduino-ft232r";
  desc  = "Arduino: FT232R connected to ISP";
  type  = "ftdi_syncbb";
  connection_type = usb;
  miso  = 3;  # CTS X3(1)
  sck   = 5;  # DSR X3(2)
  mosi  = 6;  # DCD X3(3)
  reset = 7;  # RI  X3(4)
;
```

Using `avrdude` like this is said to be slower than other methods but in my testing it
turned out to be decently quick -- not "minutes" like some comments suggest anyway.

    avrdude -c arduino-ft232r -p m328p -v


### Adafruit FTDI FT232H Breakout Board

Even better, the FT232H provides a proper MPSSE SPI interface. I mentioned above that
bit-banging is said to be slower but I didn't perceive it as too bad. Oh it *does* make
a difference! Performing a simple benchmark with successive readout and writebacks of
the `eeprom` and `flash` areas on an Arduino Nano clone took **16 seconds** using the
FT232H while it took over **two minutes** on the FT232R.

Looking from the top, the pins on the Adafruit board are used like this:

```
        USB
┏──────────────────╮
│ ■ 5V        C9 □ │
│ ■ GND       C8 □ │
│ ■ D0 SCK    C7 □ │
│ ■ D1 MOSI   C6 □ │
│ ■ D2 MISO   C5 □ │
│ ■ D3 RST    C4 □ │
│ □ D4        C3 □ │
│ □ D5        C2 □ │
│ □ D6        C1 □ │
│ □ D7        C0 □ │
╰──────────────────╯
```

The pins are all nicely in one row, so you can easily craft a custom cable, too.

![](/assets/ft232h.png)

The `avrdude` config was first described on [helix.air.net.au][helix] and is now integrated in the
systemwide config as programmer `UM232H`:

[helix]: http://www.jdunman.com/ww/AmateurRadio/SDR/helix_air_net_au%20%20AVRDUDE%20and%20FTDI%20232H.htm "Mirror"

```
# UM232H module from FTDI and Glyn.com.au.
# See helix.air.net.au for detailed usage information.
# /* ... */
# Use the -b flag to set the SPI clock rate eg -b 3750000 is the fastest I could get
# a 16MHz Atmega1280 to program reliably.  The 232H is conveniently 5V tolerant.
programmer
  id         = "UM232H";
  desc       = "FT232H based module from FTDI and Glyn.com.au";
  type       = "avrftdi";
  usbvid     = 0x0403;
  usbpid     = 0x6014;
  usbdev     = "A";
  usbvendor  = "";
  usbproduct = "";
  usbsn      = "";
#ISP-signals
  sck    = 0;
  mosi   = 1;
  miso   = 2;
  reset  = 3;
;
```

I've created two straightforward programmer aliases in my `~/.avrduderc` config and
can use these two breakout boards with `avrdude -c ft232r` and `avrdude -c ft232h`
respectively:

```
# alias for adafruit ft232h
programmer parent "UM232H"
  id         = "ft232h";
  desc       = "Adafruit FT232H based SPI programmer";
;

# alias for sparkfun ft232r breakout
programmer parent "arduino-ft232r"
  id         = "ft232r";
  desc       = "Sparkfun FT232R breakout bit-banging";
;
```

### Raspberry Pi

At the time, however, I used the GPIO pins on a Raspberry Pi Zero W and amended the
`avrdude` configuration to use bit-banging as well. Here is a possible
mapping of the GPIO pins on the 40-pin header:

```
                15 ┆ · · ┆ 16
          3.3V  17 │ x · │ 18
(GPIO 10) MOSI  19 │ x x │ 20  GND
(GPIO 09) MISO  21 │ x x │ 22  Reset (GPIO 25)
(GPIO 11) SCLK  23 │ x · │ 24
                25 ┆ · · ┆ 25
```

This wiring can be used with the following `avrdude` programmer configuration:

```
# avr programmer via linux gpio pins
programmer
  id    = "gpio";
  desc  = "Use the Linux sysfs to bitbang GPIO lines";
  type  = "linuxgpio";
  reset = 25;
  sck   = 11;
  mosi  = 10;
  miso  = 9;
;
```

Put that in `~/.avrduderc` or a seperate file, which can be included with
`avrdude -C +gpio.conf ...`. Now use this programmer config like this:

    sudo avrdude -c gpio -p m1284p -v
