content/post/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba.md, before:

---
title: Install ESXi 6.5 on a Supermicro X10SBA
description: Work around problems with the installer by using a serial connection.
date: 2018-01-19T15:35:43+01:00

draft: false
toc: true

categories:
  - blog
  - guide

tags:
  - linux
  - virtual-machines
  - serial-console
---

Trying to install VMware ESXi on a number of Intel Bay-Trail boards [apparently]
fails with a hanged installation right after a message like `Relocating modules
and starting the kernel`. There's multiple [forum posts] around the internet
where people suggest various workarounds, which never seemed to work for me.

[apparently]: https://communities.vmware.com/thread/481198
[forum posts]: https://www.vdr-portal.de/forum/index.php?thread/123723-esxi-auf-intel-baytrail-celeron-j1900-board/

One suggestion which stood out to me as most promising was completely disabling
the internal graphics chip and using a dicrete graphics card in the PCI Express
slot. Now, I didn't want to buy a graphics card just to make the installation
work - especially since this system would mostly be used completely headless:
power cord, two ethernet cables and done.

The Supermicro X10SBA board does provide a couple of COM ports though and since
I've never actually used a serial connection for anything before, I've set out
to try this route to disabling the graphics chip. _(Sidenote: my never server is
a Supermicro SYS-5028D-T4NT, which has a platform management interface (IPMI).
Boy, does that make life easier.)_

# Serial connection

## Cables

To route the internal COM1 header to the 'outside world' I used Supermicro's
low-profile COM port bracket [CBL-0010-LP]. To connect to that RS-232 port, I
then used a [USB to Null Modem] cable from StarTech.

[CBL-0010-LP]: https://www.sona.de/.187895229
[USB to Null Modem]: https://www.startech.com/Cards-Adapters/Serial-Cards-Adapters/USB-to-Null-Modem-RS232-DB9-Serial-Adapter-Cable-DCE-FTDI~ICUSB232FTN

## Settings

I am not sure about the default BIOS settings but I believe `Console
Redirection` on COM1 is enabled by default. If it is not you can find it at
`Advanced > Serial Port Console Redirection > "COM1" Console Redirection`. You
should also increase the baud rate to something sensible like 115200 in the
`Console Redirection Settings`. You could certainly change more settings and use
advanced features of the FTDI chip in your nullmodem cable but these settings
work great for me:

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/6.png)

To connect from my laptop, I use [picocom](https://linux.die.net/man/8/picocom)
after adding my user to the `uucp` group:
```
$ ll /dev/ttyUSB*
crw-rw---- 1 root uucp 188, 0 Jan 19 16:15 /dev/ttyUSB0
$ picocom -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0
```

To conclude the settings section, verify that you can successfully connect via
serial and reach the BIOS Setup and then disable the `Integrated Graphic Device`
under `Advanced > Chipset Configuration > North Bridge > Graphics
Configuration`:

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/7.png)

I am actually not sure if this is required. But I disabled it and had not
more problems during installation. And since I now had a working serial
connection I figured: why not?

# Installation Media

Next, we need to prepare an installation medium. Preferably, I would like to use
a USB stick but it turns out this is not directly supported out of the box for
ESXi. _(On my new server I simply mounted the iso on a virtual disk drive ..
hence: IPMI makes your life easier ..)_ There is a couple of guides using
Syslinux (on Linux) or Rufus (on Windows) but none of the Syslinux guides quite
worked for me and I had no Windows system at hand. Until I found a [post] in the
VMware communities, where Syslinux is simply used to load the ISO directly.

I later also discovered that you can install ESXi onto the same USB stick that
you loaded the installer from, since all the required files are apparently
loaded into memory upon startup.

## Prepare the USB Stick

So you'll probably want to use a 8GB USB stick and make sure it is empty. To
make sure it is really empty and filled with zeroes (which compress nicely when
I later create images of said stick) I ran `dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/sdc
status=progress` beforehand. (__Note:__ replace `/dev/sdX` with your actual USB
stick and make sure you don't delete your running system .. please.)

Then create a new DOS partition table and create one primary bootable partition
and format it with FAT32. Using a [scripted approach] for `fdisk` and formatting
with `mkfs.vfat`:

[post]: https://communities.vmware.com/thread/474473
[scripted approach]: https://superuser.com/a/984637

```
$ sed 's/\s*\([^\s]*\) #.*/\1/' <<EOF | fdisk /dev/sdX
o # new msdos partiton table
n # new partition
p # primary partition
1 # first partition
  # accept default start
  # accept default end
t # select type
c # select W95 FAT32 (LBA)
a # mark partition active
p # print partition table
w # write to disk
q # and quit
EOF
$ mkfs.vfat -F 32 -n USB /dev/sdX1
```

Now mount that partition somewhere, install Syslinux on it and copy the VMware
Installer ISO.

```
$ cat /usr/lib/syslinux/bios/mbr.bin > /dev/sdX
$ syslinux /dev/sdX1
$ mount /dev/sdX1 /mnt
$ cp /usr/lib/syslinux/bios/{memdisk,menu.c32,libutil.c32} /mnt/
$ cp ~/Downloads/VMware-VMvisor-Installer-201701001-4887370.x86_64.iso /mnt/
$ cat <<EOF > /mnt/syslinux.cfg
default menu.c32
menu title ISO Loader
nohalt 1
prompt 0
timeout 30

label esxi
  kernel memdisk
  append iso
  initrd VMware-VMvisor-Installer-201701001-4887370.x86_64.iso
  menu label VMware Installer ISO
EOF
$ umount /mnt
```

I was tempted to add a `serial 0 115200` line at the top but that actually kinda
broke the following loader and I could not add the required kernel parameters
for the VMware installer.

## Run the Installer

Insert the prepared USB stick into one of the USB ports of your X10SBA and make
sure that you are booting from it. You might need to adjust the boot order in
your BIOS. I chose the internal USB-A header on the motherboard.

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/4.jpg)

Since we didn't install any EFI binaries it should boot in legacy BIOS mode. But
just make sure it does anyway because the ISO is certainly containing EFI
binaries but we will not be able to add the required kernel options if we are
booting through those.

You should be greeted by this screen:

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/0.png)

Wait for the ISO to load and then quickly press `Tab` in the second loader to
add additional kernel options `gdbPort=none logPort=none tty2Port=com1`:
[reference](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere/6.5/com.vmware.vsphere.install.doc/GUID-B67A3552-CECA-4BF7-9487-4F36507CD99E.html)

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/1.png)

Append those options and press Enter. Nothing will happen for a few seconds
until you'll see loaded modules rushing by and you are finally greeted by the
VMware ESXi Installer:

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/2.png)

At this point I had to disable the fullscreen shortcut key `F11` in my
gnome-terminal settings since this key is used to accept various options in the
Installer.

I will assume that you know how to get through the following steps. Otherwise
consult VMware's own documentation on this. You can install ESXi on the same USB
stick that you booted from without any problems - that is exactly what I did.

## After the Installation

At the end, we just need to make sure that the serial console is used on every
boot. You can either mount the fifth and sixth partition of the installed USB
stick and edit both `boot.cfg` files to append the same options as above to the
`kernelopts=` line or boot it up once and use the Web Management Interface to
set these settings:
[Redirect the Direct Console to a Serial Port from the vSphere Web Client](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere/6.5/com.vmware.vsphere.install.doc/GUID-FB5146D3-A732-4523-8716-1B734E0250EE.html)

That assumes that you have a way to find out what IP the web interface uses.
Usually you should be able to see a recent DHCP lease in you router though.
Don't panic if it doesn't immediately show up: ESXi can take a few minutes
to fully load until it becomes responsive.

As far as I can tell, the default settings for both `VMkernel.Boot.logPort` and
`VMkernel.Boot.gdbPort` disable both, so you only need to set
`VMkernel.Boot.tty2Port` to `com1`. If you want to be sure, you can set both 
`logPort` and `gdbPort` to `none` to definitely disable them.

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/3.png)

After this you can reboot. It shouldn't matter if you are booting through UEFI
or legacy BIOS mode anymore either, since you should see output on the serial
console as soon as the VMKernel starts initializing (which takes a little more
than a minute in my case).

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/5.png)

Voilà!

Commit message:

esxi on x10sba: add some additional notes

content/post/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba.md, after:

---
title: Install ESXi 6.5 on a Supermicro X10SBA
description: Work around problems with the installer by using a serial connection.
date: 2018-01-19T15:35:43+01:00

draft: false
toc: true

categories:
  - blog
  - guide

tags:
  - linux
  - virtual-machines
  - serial-console
---

Trying to install VMware ESXi on a number of Intel Bay-Trail boards [apparently]
fails with a hanged installation right after a message like `Relocating modules
and starting the kernel`. There's multiple [forum posts] around the internet
where people suggest various workarounds, which never seemed to work for me.

[apparently]: https://communities.vmware.com/thread/481198
[forum posts]: https://www.vdr-portal.de/forum/index.php?thread/123723-esxi-auf-intel-baytrail-celeron-j1900-board/

One suggestion which stood out to me as most promising was completely disabling
the internal graphics chip and using a dicrete graphics card in the PCI Express
slot. Now, I didn't want to buy a graphics card just to make the installation
work - especially since this system would mostly be used completely headless:
power cord, two ethernet cables and done.

The Supermicro X10SBA board does provide a couple of COM ports though and since
I've never actually used a serial connection for anything before, I've set out
to try this route to disabling the graphics chip. _(Sidenote: my never server is
a Supermicro SYS-5028D-T4NT, which has a platform management interface (IPMI).
Boy, does that make life easier.)_

# Serial connection

## Cables

To route the internal COM1 header to the 'outside world' I used Supermicro's
low-profile COM port bracket [CBL-0010-LP]. To connect to that RS-232 port, I
then used a [USB to Null Modem] cable from StarTech.

[CBL-0010-LP]: https://www.sona.de/.187895229
[USB to Null Modem]: https://www.startech.com/Cards-Adapters/Serial-Cards-Adapters/USB-to-Null-Modem-RS232-DB9-Serial-Adapter-Cable-DCE-FTDI~ICUSB232FTN

## Settings

I am not sure about the default BIOS settings but I believe `Console
Redirection` on COM1 is enabled by default. If it is not you can find it at
`Advanced > Serial Port Console Redirection > "COM1" Console Redirection`. You
should also increase the baud rate to something sensible like 115200 in the
`Console Redirection Settings`. You could certainly change more settings and use
advanced features of the FTDI chip in your nullmodem cable but these settings
work great for me:

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/6.png)

To connect from my laptop, I use [picocom](https://linux.die.net/man/8/picocom)
after adding my user to the `uucp` group:
```
$ ll /dev/ttyUSB*
crw-rw---- 1 root uucp 188, 0 Jan 19 16:15 /dev/ttyUSB0
$ picocom -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0
```

To conclude the settings section, verify that you can successfully connect via
serial and reach the BIOS Setup and then disable the `Integrated Graphic Device`
under `Advanced > Chipset Configuration > North Bridge > Graphics
Configuration`:

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/7.png)

I am actually not sure if this is required. But I disabled it and had no
more problems during installation. And since I now had a working serial
connection I figured: why not?

# Installation Media

Next, we need to prepare an installation medium. Preferably, I would like to use
a USB stick but it turns out this is not directly supported out of the box for
ESXi. _(On my new server I simply mounted the iso on a virtual disk drive ..
hence: IPMI makes your life easier ..)_ There is a couple of guides using
Syslinux (on Linux) or Rufus (on Windows) but none of the Syslinux guides quite
worked for me and I had no Windows system at hand. Until I found a [post] in the
VMware communities, where Syslinux is simply used to load the ISO directly.

I later also discovered that you can install ESXi onto the same USB stick that
you loaded the installer from, since all the required files are apparently
loaded into memory upon startup.

## Prepare the USB Stick

So you'll probably want to use a 8GB USB stick and make sure it is empty. To
make sure it is really empty and filled with zeroes (which compress nicely when
I later create images of said stick) I ran `dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/sdc
status=progress` beforehand. (__Note:__ replace `/dev/sdX` with your actual USB
stick and make sure you don't delete your running system .. please.)

Then create a new DOS partition table and create one primary bootable partition
and format it with FAT32. Using a [scripted approach] for `fdisk` and formatting
with `mkfs.vfat`:

[post]: https://communities.vmware.com/thread/474473
[scripted approach]: https://superuser.com/a/984637

```
$ sed 's/\s*\([^\s]*\) #.*/\1/' <<EOF | fdisk /dev/sdX
o # new msdos partiton table
n # new partition
p # primary partition
1 # first partition
  # accept default start
  # accept default end
t # select type
c # select W95 FAT32 (LBA)
a # mark partition active
p # print partition table
w # write to disk
q # and quit
EOF
$ mkfs.vfat -F 32 -n USB /dev/sdX1
```

Now mount that partition somewhere, install Syslinux on it and copy the VMware
Installer ISO.

```
$ cat /usr/lib/syslinux/bios/mbr.bin > /dev/sdX
$ syslinux /dev/sdX1
$ mount /dev/sdX1 /mnt
$ cp /usr/lib/syslinux/bios/{memdisk,menu.c32,libutil.c32} /mnt/
$ cp ~/Downloads/VMware-VMvisor-Installer-201701001-4887370.x86_64.iso /mnt/
$ cat <<EOF > /mnt/syslinux.cfg
default menu.c32
menu title ISO Loader
nohalt 1
prompt 0
timeout 30

label esxi
  kernel memdisk
  append iso
  initrd VMware-VMvisor-Installer-201701001-4887370.x86_64.iso
  menu label VMware Installer ISO
EOF
$ umount /mnt
```

I was tempted to add a `serial 0 115200` line at the top but that actually kinda
broke the following loader and I could not add the required kernel parameters
for the VMware installer.

## Run the Installer

Insert the prepared USB stick into one of the USB ports of your X10SBA and make
sure that you are booting from it. You might need to adjust the boot order in
your BIOS. I chose the internal USB-A header on the motherboard.

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/4.jpg)

Since we didn't install any EFI binaries it should boot in legacy BIOS mode. But
just make sure it does anyway because the ISO is certainly containing EFI
binaries but we will not be able to add the required kernel options if we are
booting through those.

You should be greeted by this screen:

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/0.png)

Wait for the ISO to load and then quickly press `Tab` in the second loader to
add additional kernel options `gdbPort=none logPort=none tty2Port=com1`:
[reference](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere/6.5/com.vmware.vsphere.install.doc/GUID-B67A3552-CECA-4BF7-9487-4F36507CD99E.html)

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/1.png)

Append those options and press Enter. Nothing will happen for a few seconds
until you'll see loaded modules rushing by and you are finally greeted by the
VMware ESXi Installer:

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/2.png)

At this point I had to disable the fullscreen shortcut key `F11` in my
gnome-terminal settings since this key is used to accept various options in the
Installer.

I will assume that you know how to get through the following steps. Otherwise
consult VMware's own documentation on this. You can install ESXi on the same USB
stick that you booted from without any problems - that is exactly what I did.

## After the Installation

At the end, we just need to make sure that the serial console is used on every
boot. You can either mount the fifth and sixth partition of the installed USB
stick and edit both `boot.cfg` files to append the same options as above to the
`kernelopts=` line or boot it up once and use the Web Management Interface to
set these settings:
[Redirect the Direct Console to a Serial Port from the vSphere Web Client](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere/6.5/com.vmware.vsphere.install.doc/GUID-FB5146D3-A732-4523-8716-1B734E0250EE.html)

That assumes that you have a way to find out what IP the web interface uses.
Usually you should be able to see a recent DHCP lease in you router though.
Don't panic if it doesn't immediately show up: ESXi can take a few minutes
to fully load until it becomes responsive.

As far as I can tell, the default settings for both `VMkernel.Boot.logPort` and
`VMkernel.Boot.gdbPort` disable both, so you only need to set
`VMkernel.Boot.tty2Port` to `com1`. If you want to be sure, you can set both 
`logPort` and `gdbPort` to `none` to definitely disable them.

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/3.png)

After this you can reboot. It shouldn't matter if you are booting through UEFI
or legacy BIOS mode anymore either, since you should see output on the serial
console as soon as the VMKernel starts initializing (which takes a little more
than a minute in my case).

![](/images/install-esxi-6.5-on-a-supermicro-x10sba/5.png)

Voilà!

## Additional Notes

- I am using [this patch tracker] to get commands to update to the latest image
  profile. Click on the profile to pop up the shell commands.

- Trying to update to the latest profile resulted in an `[Errno 28] No space
  left on device` error. A user on [reddit] hinted towards swap space: configure
  a datastore to be used for swap and retry. My SYS-5028D has 64 GB of RAM,
  hence I just never hit that limit before I guess.

  
[this patch tracker]: https://esxi-patches.v-front.de/ESXi-6.5.0.html
[reddit]: https://www.reddit.com/r/vmware/comments/6q4akd/error_trying_to_update_an_esxi_65_host_to_the/dla2qfm/
